Ocean acidification is considered a major threat to marine ecosystems and may particularly affect calcifying organisms such as corals, foraminifera and coccolithophores.
Here we investigate the impact of elevated pCO2 and lowered pH on growth and calcification in the common calcareous dinoflagellate Thoracosphaera heimii.
We observe a substantial reduction in growth rate, calcification and cyst stability of T. heimii under elevated pCO2.
Furthermore, transcriptomic analyses reveal CO2 sensitive regulation of many genes, particularly those being associated to inorganic carbon acquisition and calcification.
Stable carbon isotope fractionation for organic carbon production increased with increasing pCO2 whereas it decreased for calcification, which suggests interdependence between both processes.
We also found a strong effect of pCO2 on the stable oxygen isotopic composition of calcite, in line with earlier observations concerning another T. heimii strain.
The observed changes in stable oxygen and carbon isotope composition of T. heimii cysts may provide an ideal tool for reconstructing past seawater carbonate chemistry, and ultimately past pCO2.
Although the function of calcification in T. heimii remains unresolved, this trait likely plays an important role in the ecological and evolutionary success of this species.
Acting on calcification as well as growth, ocean acidification may therefore impose a great threat for T. heimii.
Introduction
The oceans have taken up about one third of all CO2 emitted by anthropogenic activities since the onset of the industrial revolution [1]-[3].
This directly impacts seawater carbonate chemistry by increasing concentrations of CO2 and bicarbonate (HCO3-), decreasing concentrations of carbonate (CO32-) and a lowering of pH [4].
The acidification of ocean waters might impact marine life, notably calcifying organisms that use inorganic carbon to produce a calcium carbonate (CaCO3) shell.
Calcifying organisms play an important ecological and biogeochemical role in marine ecosystems, evident from extensive coral reefs and vast calcite deposits found in geological records.
Ocean acidification has been shown to reduce calcification of various key calcifying organisms such as corals [5], foraminifera [6], and coccolithophores [7], [8].
Little is yet known about the general responses of calcareous dinoflagellates [9], and no study so far investigated the impact of ocean acidification on their calcification.
Dinoflagellates feature a complex life-cycle that often includes formation of cysts.
In some species, these cysts are made of calcite and can contribute substantially to the ocean carbonate flux in certain regions [10]-[12].
Thoracosphaera heimii, the most common calcareous dinoflagellate species in present-day ocean, is autotrophic and occurs typically in subtropical and tropical waters [13]-[15].
The main life-cycle stage of T. heimii comprises coccoid vegetative cells with a calcium carbonate shell, so-called vegetative cysts [16], [17].
Although the term cyst is most often used for long-term resting stages that are typically produced after sexual reproduction, in T. heimii this term is used for its coccoid vegetative stage.
Cysts of T. heimii can be commonly found in the fossil record in sediments dating back to the Cretaceous [18].
Therefore, T. heimii cysts may serve as potential proxy for reconstructing the past climate.
For instance, Sr/Ca ratios have been shown to correlate well with sea surface temperatures [19], but also the oxygen and carbon isotopes trapped in the cysts could provide useful proxies.
The oxygen isotopic composition (delta18O) of calcite was found to be strongly controlled by the temperature and the delta18O of the seawater in which the organism calcifies [20]-[22].
In abiotic precipitation experiments, the delta18O of calcite is mainly a function of the delta18O and speciation of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC), where dissolved CO2 is heavier with respect to 18O than HCO3- and CO32- [23], [24].
Similarly, the carbon isotopic composition (delta13C) of calcite is predominantly controlled by the delta13C and speciation of DIC, yet dissolved CO2 is depleted with respect to 13C relative to HCO3- and CO32- [21], [25].
In unicellular calcifiers like coccolithophores and T. heimii, calcification occurs intracellularly in specialized vesicles [16], [26], [27].
Therefore, the inorganic carbon used for calcification by these organisms must be derived from the intracellular inorganic carbon (Ci) pool.
Consequently, changes in delta18O and delta13C of calcite should resemble changes in the intracellular Ci pool and may provide insights in the physiological processes underlying calcification and organic carbon production.
Comparable to coccolithophores, ocean acidification likely reduces calcification in T. heimii as well.
Furthermore, increasing concentrations of CO2 are expected to alter the stable carbon and oxygen isotopic composition of T. heimii cysts.
To test these hypotheses, we grew T. heimii at a range of CO2 levels and followed its responses in growth and calcification.
Besides the assessment of delta18O and delta13C in T. heimii as a proxy, we use its isotopic composition as a tool to understand processes involved in organic carbon production and calcification.
Transcriptomic analyses were applied to reveal mechanisms underlying the observed responses.
Results
Increasing concentrations of CO2 cause a strong decline in growth (Fig. 1A), which decreases by up to 53% over the investigated CO2 range (Table S2).
Although the total carbon quota (TPC) is not affected by CO2 (Table S2), the organic carbon quota (POC) gradually increases while the inorganic carbon quota (PIC) shows a substantial decrease (Fig. 1B).
Consequently, the PIC:POC ratio strongly decreases with increasing concentrations of CO2 (Fig. 1C), showing a decrease of ~54% from the lowest to the highest CO2 treatment (Table S2).
The reduced degree of calcification is also evident from the cyst morphology.
In the lowest CO2 treatment, the majority of cysts shows a fully closed and completed calcite structure (Fig. 2A-C).
At the highest CO2 concentration, however, calcification of most cysts is incomplete (Fig. 2D-H).
Some cysts show initial stages of calcification, indicated by typical square pores (Fig. 2E,F) [16].
In other cysts, the numerous crystallization sites remain unconnected showing clear cavities in the calcite structure (Fig. 2G,H).
These cavities likely cause the collapse of many cysts upon filtration (Fig. 2D, white arrows).
With increasing concentrations of CO2, the number of completed cysts dramatically decreases from ~98% at the lowest CO2 treatment towards ~18% at the highest CO2 treatment (Fig. 1D).
Carbon isotope fractionation responds strongly to the applied CO2 treatments, showing an increase in epsilonp and a decrease in epsilonk with increasing pCO2 (Fig. 3A).
In other words, the organic carbon fraction of the cells becomes depleted in 13C while the inorganic carbon fraction (i.e. the calcite) increases its 13C content.
Furthermore, the calcite also becomes 18O-enriched, indicated by the increase in delta18Ocalcite with increasing pCO2 (Fig. 3B).
As dissolved CO2 is heavier than HCO3- and CO32- [24], increasing CO2 levels cause delta18ODIC to increase (Fig. 3B).
Yet, changes are relatively small and the delta18ODIC remains close to that of HCO3-, which is the dominant inorganic carbon species.
To permit comparison with previous findings, delta18Ocalcite values were corrected for the delta18O of water (-0.52+/-0.07 /1000) and plotted as a function of CO32- concentration (Fig. 3C).
Calcite delta18O decreases strongly with increasing concentrations of CO32-, and the slope is similar to the one reported for another T. heimii strain (RCC1511) [9].
The transcriptome indicates substantial gene regulation in response to changes in carbonate chemistry, with a total of 9701 genes being expressed (Fig. S2).
The expression of the majority of genes was treatment specific, amounting to 3183, 2704, and 2176 genes in the low, present-day and high CO2 treatments, respectively (Fig. S2).
Interestingly, the number of expressed genes to which a function could be assigned by comparison with public databases was highest in the low and present-day CO2 treatment (~22%), and lowest in the high CO2 treatment (~13%).
The expressed genes from each treatment are differentially distributed over different 'eukaryotic orthologous groups' (KOGs; Fig. S3 and Table S3).
Although the total number of expressed genes is largely comparable between treatments, different sets of genes within the KOGs are expressed.
About 55% of the number of expressed and annotated genes in each treatment are associated to the KOGs 'Translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis', 'Signal transduction mechanisms', 'Posttranslational modification, protein turnover and chaperons', and 'Energy production and conversion' (Fig. S3).
Expression of genes associated to the latter two categories increased in response to increasing pCO2.
In contrast, expression of genes involved in 'Inorganic ion transport and metabolism' decreased in the high CO2 treatment (Fig. S3).
We therefore investigated the genes involved in ion transport and inorganic carbon acquisition in more detail (Fig. 4; Table S4).
We observed a substantial regulation of genes associated to vacuolar Ca2+ and H+ transport, including P-type Ca2+ ATPases, Ca2+/Na+ exchangers (NCX1), Ca2+/H+ antiporters (VCX), and vacuolar H+ ATPases (V-ATPase).
In particular, the relative expression of genes associated to NCX and V-ATPase decreases from the low to the high CO2 treatment (Fig. 4).
Similarly, the relative expression of genes associated to carbonic anhydrases (CA) and aquaporins decreases with increasing pCO2.
In the present-day CO2 treatment, we observed expression of a gene associated to an SLC4 family anion exchanger (AE), most likely responsible for the transport of HCO3- into the cell (Fig. 4) [39].
This gene was expressed in neither the low nor the high CO2 treatment.
An SLC26 family SO43-/HCO3-/C2O42- anion exchanger (SAT-1) was yet another exclusive expression of a gene only found in the low CO2 treatment.
The potential role of this anion exchanger in Ci acquisition by phytoplankton remains to be elucidated.
Discussion
Growth and Carbon Production
Our results show considerable impacts of elevated pCO2 on T. heimii, with strong decreases in its growth rate and degree of calcification (Fig. 1, 2).
Despite the increase in organic carbon quota (POC), the overall biomass production decreases substantially with increasing pCO2 (Table S2).
Higher availability of CO2 has been shown to promote phytoplankton growth and carbon production [40], [41].
Such CO2 responses are typically associated to the poor catalytic properties of RubisCO, which is characterized by low affinities for its substrate CO2.
Increasing concentrations of CO2 are however accompanied by a reduction in pH, which may have consequences for calcification.
For the most common coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi, lowered pH in fact hampers calcification while elevated pCO2 stimulates biomass production, causing a reallocation of carbon and energy between these key processes [42], [43].
This flexibility may explain why growth in E. huxleyi is typically not affected by ocean acidification [44].
In T. heimii, however, we observed a strong decrease in calcification, in biomass production as well as in growth.
Apparently, T. heimii lacks the ability to efficiently reallocate cellular carbon between pathways and maintain growth relatively unaffected.
Our data furthermore suggests that calcification plays a fundamental role in its growth, life cycle and hence survival.
Recent findings have shown that growth and calcification by E. huxleyi may, at least partly, recover from ocean acidification as result of evolutionary adaptation [45].
Whether or not T. heimii exhibits such capabilities of adaptive evolution can only be answered from long-term incubations over hundreds of generations [46].
Transcriptomic analyses reveal a substantial regulation of genes in response to elevated pCO2.
Even though no major shift in the relative distribution of expressed genes to the functional categories (KOGs) is induced by the treatments, T. heimii uses different sets of genes within these categories.
There is a slight increase in the expression of genes associated to signal transduction and posttranslational modifications upon elevated pCO2, and a decrease in the expression of genes involved in inorganic ion transport (Fig. S3), suggesting that T. heimii readjusts its transcriptome on several levels when grown under different pCO2.
Many phytoplankton species have the ability to deal with changes in CO2 availability by regulating their so-called carbon concentrating mechanism (CCMs) [47]-[49].
T. heimii also appears to regulate its proteome towards changes by down-regulating genes involved in CA and aquaporins under elevated pCO2, and by up-regulating these genes under lowered pCO2 (Fig. 4).
CA accelerates the equilibrium between CO2 and HCO3-, and can be located both intra- and extracellularly.
From our results it remains unclear whether T. heimii expresses intra- or extracellular CA.
Yet, in both cases CA plays a key role in the CCM, as it replenishes the CO2 around RubisCO (intracellular) or the carbon source being depleted in the boundary layer due to active uptake (extracellular) [49], [50].
Aquaporins have been suggested to play a role in CO2 transport [47], [51], which is supported by the observed CO2-dependency in our expression patterns.
Besides CO2 also HCO3- is often transported into the cell, which will facilitate the high intra-cellular CO2 requirements imposed by RubisCO.
Indeed, T. heimii expresses genes associated to putative HCO3- transporters at both low and present-day pCO2, but not at high pCO2 (Fig. 4).
Our results thus suggest a down-scaling of the CCM in T. heimii under elevated pCO2, which possibly makes energy available for other processes as it has been observed in other species [43], [52].
Yet it seems that neither the down-scaling of the CCM nor an extensive regulation of the transcriptome can compensate for the adverse effects of elevated pCO2 on growth and calcification in T. heimii.
Calcification and Isotope Fractionation
Calcification in T. heimii was strongly affected by elevated pCO2.
Along with a reduction in the degree of calcification (Fig. 1B,C), also the morphology of T. heimii cysts was influenced (Fig. 2).
With elevated pCO2 the number of completed cysts dramatically decreased and the number of collapsed cysts increased.
The completed calcite structures predominant at low and present-day pCO2 resemble those of mature T. heimii cells, whereas the incomplete calcite structures, prevailing under high pCO2, resemble those of young cells [16], [26].
The incomplete cysts in our experiments, however, often contain an opening through which the cell has left for division, being indicative for mature cells.
Thus, cells remained either in the cyst too short for completing the calcite structure, the calcite cyst was directly affected by the low pH of the water, and/or cells reduced their calcification rates.
Since growth rates were strongly reduced upon elevated pCO2, it seems unlikely that cells remained in the cyst stage too short for completion of the cyst, as could be expected under enhanced growth rates.
Although pH in our highest CO2 treatment was close to 7.6, the water still remained supersaturated with respect to calcite (i.e. an Omegacalcite >1.2; Table S2), and calcite dissolution seem unlikely to have caused the incompletion and cavities in the calcite structure (Fig. 2).
Thus, the large number of affected T. heimii cysts at elevated pCO2 seems mainly to be a result of reduced calcification rates by the cells.
Calcification in T. heimii likely takes place intracellularly in vesicles [16], [26], comparable to coccolithophores [9], [27].
Hence, the inorganic carbon needed for calcification is obtained from the intracellular inorganic carbon pool (Ci), which may deviate strongly from external conditions in terms of speciation as well as isotopic composition.
We observed an increase of carbon isotope fractionation for organic carbon production (epsilonp), whereas it decreased for calcite formation (epsilonk) in response to elevated pCO2 (Fig. 3A).
With a higher availability of CO2, more of the intracellular Ci pool may be replenished by CO2, which is depleted in 13C compared to HCO3-.
Consequently, RubisCO can fractionate against an isotopically lighter Ci pool and thus better express its preference for lighter 12C, which could explain the increasing epsilonp.
As a consequence, the intracellular Ci pool becomes enriched with 13C by so-called Rayleigh distillation, which a priori could explain the decrease in epsilonk.
However, increased CO2 availability in combination with a reduced organic carbon production should lead to a lowered Rayleigh distillation, and in fact decrease the enrichment of 13C within the cell.
Also, Rayleigh distillation should always feedback on CO2 fixation as well as CaCO3 precipitation, and thus cannot explain the opposing trends of fractionation in those processes.
The opposing CO2 effects on epsilonp and epsilonk can thus only be explained if both processes use Ci pools that are isotopically different.
CO2 fixation uses the Ci pool within the chloroplast, which is affected by the relative CO2 and HCO3- fluxes, the CO2 leakage as well as the intrinsic fractionation by RubisCO [53], [54].
The Ci pool for calcification will mainly be controlled by the condition in the cytosol, which in turn is largely affected by the processes in the chloroplast.
Discrimination of 13C during fixation will lead to 13CO2 efflux from the chloroplast, causing the cytosolic Ci pool to be enriched with 13CO2.
If this 13CO2 is prevented from fast conversion to HCO3- due to a lack of cytosolic CA activity, it could enter the calcifying vesicle by diffusion and be 'trapped' by the high pH resulting from proton pumping (Fig. 5).
In fact, we do observe a higher epsilonp (i.e. more 13CO2 can accumulate) and lower overall CA activities under elevated pCO2 (i.e. 13CO2 is not rapidly converted to HCO3-), which could have attributed to the opposing trends of 13C fractionation during organic and inorganic carbon production.
To fully understand the intriguing interplay between these processes and their 13C fractionation, detailed measurements on the modes of Ci acquisition in T. heimii are needed.
The oxygen isotopic composition (delta18O) of calcite was also strongly affected in T. heimii, and increased by almost 6 /1000 over the investigated CO2 range (Fig. 3B).
Even though biologically mediated, precipitation of calcite is an abiogenic process, which does not directly involve enzymatic reactions and thus mainly depends on the carbonate chemistry at the calcification site.
Assuming negligible fractionation during the transport into the calcification vesicle, delta18Ocalcite should therefore predominantly reflect the delta18O of the Ci species used for calcification.
Ci species differ strongly in their delta18O values, ranging from lower values for CO32- (-4.7 /1000) and HCO3- (2.1 /1000) to much higher values for CO2 (11.2 /1000) [24].
A previous study proposed a conceptual model to explain the delta18O dependence of T. heimii calcite and other unicellular planktonic calcifiers on seawater CO32- concentration (Fig. 3C) [9].
The authors attribute the negative slope between delta18O and [CO32-] to an increased contribution of HCO3- to the calcification vesicle.
Also in our data, delta18Ocalcite increases with increasing pCO2, starting from values close to the delta18O of CO32- towards those of HCO3- (Fig. 3B).
As argued above, however, the Ci pool in the calcifying vesicle may also be increasingly influenced by CO2, which is in line with the observed trends in delta18Ocalcite.
Such a shift in Ci speciation may be an indication for a lowered intracellular pH, which in fact could be the reason for the hampered calcification under elevated pCO2 [55], [56].
Multiple genes associated to calcification have been described for E. huxleyi and include genes associated to the regulation of inorganic ions [39], [55]-[59].
Here we show that the expression of genes in T. heimii being involved in inorganic ion transport, in particular Ca2+ transport, decreased upon elevated pCO2 (Fig. 4; Fig. S3).
This decrease in ion transport is in line with the observed decrease in calcification, which is comparable to observations in E. huxleyi [39], [59].
We also observed a strong CO2 dependent regulation of the vacuolar H+-ATPases (V-ATPase).
These pumps play a key role in generating H+ gradients and membrane voltage, which drive multiple transport processes [57], [60].
As indicated from our data, H+-ATPases seem to play an important role in calcification in T. heimii, which is in agreement to observations for E. huxleyi and Pleurochrysis carterae [39], [59], [61].
Here we propose a conceptual model of calcification in T. heimii, which comprises some of the main processes described in this study (Fig. 5).
Although many processes remain to be elucidated, this is a first step towards understanding the process of calcification in dinoflagellates.
Paleo Proxies
The delta18O isotopic composition of T. heimii cysts has been used for the reconstruction of past temperatures [22], [62].
Indeed, delta18O changed linearly from about -1 to -4 /1000 with an increase in temperature from about 12 to 30degreesC.
At the same time, however, pH decreased from about 8.4 to 7.9 in this study [22].
Hence, the observed changes in delta18O were most probably a result of both changes in temperature and seawater carbonate chemistry [see also 62].
Here we show remarkable changes in delta18O from about 0 to -5 /1000 with an increase in [CO32-] from 50 to 260 micromol L-1, which is largely in agreement to an earlier study including a different T. heimii strain (Fig. 3C) [9].
Interestingly, the observed slopes of delta18O/[CO32-] in both T. heimii strains are up to 10-fold steeper compared the coccolithophore Calcidiscus leptoporus and different foraminifera species [9], [25], [63].
Thus, the apparent 18O fractionation during calcification in T. heimii is much more sensitive to changes in [CO32-] as compared to other key planktonic marine calcifiers.
The steep slope and negative correlation between delta18O and [CO32-] observed in both T. heimii strains suggests that the delta18O in T. heimii cysts may be a good candidate to serve as a proxy for past CO32- concentrations in ocean waters.
This relationship may provide an ideal asset, especially when combined with different delta18O/[CO32-] slopes observed in for instance coccolithophores, which will exclude confounding effects of additional environmental parameters such as temperature.
Ultimately, this proxy could be further developed for reconstructing past atmospheric pCO2.
Conclusion
We observed a strong reduction in growth rate and calcification of T. heimii under elevated pCO2.
Although the function of calcification in T. heimii remains unresolved, it likely plays an important role in its ecological and evolutionary success.
Acting on calcification as well as growth, ocean acidification may impose a great threat for T. heimii.
Furthermore, the strong correlations between the stable isotope composition and carbonate chemistry suggest a great potential of T. heimii cysts to be used as paleo proxy for reconstructing seawater carbonate chemistry and ultimately past atmospheric pCO2.
